[GEP-26] Add documentation about the structure of `WorkloadIdentity` JWT (#12879)
gardener/gardener: docs/usage/shoot/shoot-workload-identity.md

description: Configure access to infrastructure accounts via workload identity instead of static credentials
---

> ## Shoot Workload Identity

Reviewer: Why the document starts with h2 and not h1?

Author: The MD linter throws 
> MD025/single-title/single-h1: Multiple top-level headings in the same documentmarkdownlint[MD025](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint/blob/v0.38.0/doc/md025.md)

Reviewer: Where is the other top-level heading? L2, the `title` field in the front matter?

Reviewer: 1. I am not sure if you are required to specify a `title` in the front-matter as it would be the same as it would be generated by the file name. IIRC, the convention was to specify title only when we have to overwrite the title. Here @Kostov6 and @n-boshnakov can share what is exactly the convention we follow and when we specify the title in the front-matter.
2. I am not sure from where this linter comes from. Shouldn't we ignore it as it is not imposed by a linter in Gardener and I am not aware of other files following the same?

Reviewer 2: You are correct, the title doesn't need to be specified in the frontmatter so long as it's the same as the file name.

Author: Indeed using MD linter is not an established practice, I will revert this change.

- **aud**: contains the audiences set in `WorkloadIdentity`'s `.spec.audiences` field.
- **iss**: issuer of the JWT, see above how to find its value for your Garden installation.
- **sub**: contains the subject of the JWT, it is following the format `gardener.cloud:workloadidentity:<workload-identity-namespace>:<workload-identity-name>:<workload-identity-uid>`, its value can be found also in `WorkloadIdentity`'s `.status.sub` field.
- **iat**: issued at time, a timestamp in the format of number of seconds since unix epoch.
- **exp**: expiration time, a timestamp in the format of number of seconds since unix epoch.
- **nbf**: not before time, a timestamp in the format of number of seconds since unix epoch.
- **jti**: JWT ID, a unique identifier for the JWT.

Gardener API Server is using the private namespace `gardener.cloud` to set additional claims in the JWT.
Their purpose is to bear Gardener specific information about the context of usage of the JWT.
The always set claim in this private namespace is `workloadIdentity` which contains the name, namespace and uid of the `WorkloadIdentity` resource used to issue the JWT.

> When Gardenlet is requesting the JWT, Gardener API Server takes care to set even more claims.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When Gardenlet is requesting the JWT, Gardener API Server takes care to enhance the token with additional claims.
```

In the scenario where `WorkloadIdentity` is used as Shoot infrastructure credentials, such additional claims are:

- **shoot**: contains the name, namespace and uid of the Shoot using the JWT.
- **project**: contains the name and uid of the Gardener Project of the Shoot.
- **seed**: contains the name and uid of the Seed where the Shoot control plane is running.

Here is an example payload of workload identity JWT requested by Gardenlet:

```json
{
    "aud": "audience-1",
    "iss": "https://discovery.ingress.garden.local.gardener.cloud/garden/workload-identity/issuer",
    "sub": "gardener.cloud:workloadidentity:garden-bar:infra-a:3937d9b4-5b39-47b4-849b-ae25785834ca",
    "iat": 1756876768,
    "exp": 1756898368,
    "nbf": 1756876768,
    "jti": "5303b42e-7c75-439d-b7d3-3a842c7fdd98",
    "gardener.cloud": {
        "workloadIdentity": {
            "name": "infra-a",
            "namespace": "garden-bar",
            "uid": "3937d9b4-5b39-47b4-849b-ae25785834ca"
        },
        "shoot": {
            "name": "shoot-1",
            "namespace": "garden-foo",
            "uid": "a309d47b-4a30-4cc8-9371-5ef569e7c23e"
        },
        "project": {

>             "name": "local",

Reviewer 3: Nit: can we use a more realistic name for the project

```suggestion
            "name": "dev",
```

> one would have to create a new `CredentialsBinding` that references a `WorkloadIdentity` and set the `.spec.credentialsBindingName` field of the `Shoot`
> to refer to the newly created `CredentialsBinding`.

> ## JWT claims

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## JWT Claims
```

> Gardener API Server, as JWT issuer, set the following standard claims as per [RFC 7519](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Gardener API server, as JWT issuer, sets the following standard claims as per [RFC 7519](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519):
```

- **aud**: contains the audiences set in `WorkloadIdentity`'s `.spec.audiences` field.
- **iss**: issuer of the JWT, see above how to find its value for your Garden installation.
- **sub**: contains the subject of the JWT, it is following the format `gardener.cloud:workloadidentity:<workload-identity-namespace>:<workload-identity-name>:<workload-identity-uid>`, its value can be found also in `WorkloadIdentity`'s `.status.sub` field.
- **iat**: issued at time, a timestamp in the format of number of seconds since unix epoch.
- **exp**: expiration time, a timestamp in the format of number of seconds since unix epoch.
- **nbf**: not before time, a timestamp in the format of number of seconds since unix epoch.
- **jti**: JWT ID, a unique identifier for the JWT.

> Gardener API Server is using the private namespace `gardener.cloud` to set additional claims in the JWT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Gardener API server is using the private namespace `gardener.cloud` to set additional claims in the JWT.
```

Their purpose is to bear Gardener specific information about the context of usage of the JWT.
The always set claim in this private namespace is `workloadIdentity` which contains the name, namespace and uid of the `WorkloadIdentity` resource used to issue the JWT.

> When Gardenlet is requesting the JWT, Gardener API Server takes care to enhance the token with additional claims.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Gardenlet is requesting the JWT, the Gardener API server takes care to enhance the token with additional claims.
```

- **project**: contains the name and uid of the Gardener Project of the Shoot.
- **seed**: contains the name and uid of the Seed where the Shoot control plane is running.

Here is an example payload of workload identity JWT requested by Gardenlet:

```json
{
    "aud": "audience-1",
    "iss": "https://discovery.ingress.garden.local.gardener.cloud/garden/workload-identity/issuer",
    "sub": "gardener.cloud:workloadidentity:garden-bar:infra-a:3937d9b4-5b39-47b4-849b-ae25785834ca",
    "iat": 1756876768,
    "exp": 1756898368,
    "nbf": 1756876768,
    "jti": "5303b42e-7c75-439d-b7d3-3a842c7fdd98",
    "gardener.cloud": {
        "workloadIdentity": {
            "name": "infra-a",
            "namespace": "garden-bar",
            "uid": "3937d9b4-5b39-47b4-849b-ae25785834ca"
        },
        "shoot": {
            "name": "shoot-1",
            "namespace": "garden-dev",
            "uid": "a309d47b-4a30-4cc8-9371-5ef569e7c23e"
        },
        "project": {
            "name": "dev",
            "uid": "5660a988-506a-421b-b362-95f101629981"
        },
        "seed": {
            "name": "seed-1",
            "uid": "41ccaabf-5141-4189-9a14-0c3078beabcc"
        }
    }
}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
